# Project Reflection

I started these projects (especially the exploratory project) from the mindset that it’s very difficult to know your congressional district. My priority, and the central point of the resulting exploratory dashboard, then became the map. From there, I wanted to create an information panel which would highlight who the particular representative was. The goal with the information panel was both to educate the user—many people don’t know who their representatives are, because gerrymandering so arbitrarily draws district lines—and to give them better access to their representative. Then I wanted two charts that would give both an overview of the budget spent and something more granular.
I had always planned for a donut chart and a time series, but I kept fiddling with ideas of how to represent the time series throughout the semester, finally settling back on my original idea of a scatterplot. The scatterplot made it so clear when a certain record was astronomically high in comparison to everything else, which is what I got when I read through the dataset, and was exactly what I wanted to visualize. The donut chart was somewhat of an aesthetic choice for me—I’ve never made a donut chart before, and I think they’re incredibly pretty. The results were absolutely worth going against the common idea that donut and pie charts aren’t great for representing parts of a whole. My color choices are fairly standard, mostly because red and blue contain such partisan connotations, especially in visualizations about politics. The layout was tricky, but in essence, I wanted users to feel like they could “drive” the project—beginning with the map in the center, and then all of the supplementary materials around it.
For my narrative project, I wanted to explain why I chose travel as my focus, so a treemap felt like a natural choice—they’re generally regarded as one of the best options for representing parts of a whole, and I also wanted a chance to implement some of the lessons I learned from our tutorials. After that, I knew I wanted some kind of bar chart showing the top 10 spenders—since there are so many representatives, it wouldn’t be feasible to show all 436 of them. The chart actually began as a standard bar chart and morphed into a horizontal bar chart when I thought about how I wanted the user to engage with such huge numbers.
I’d wanted to delve into the “purpose” column in my dataset in the exploratory project, but it would have contained too many variables. With a much more narrow subset, I figured it would be perfect for a sunburst. For my last chart, I came across the calendar view visualization by Mike Bostock on Observable and instantly wanted to know how he did that. I’d already done a time series chart in the previous project, so I knew the data was ready for it, and I thought maybe visualizing the value shift would bring out further insights. My color choices, again, are fairly safe, but the sunburst was very tricky. It mixes sequential and categorical data in a way that isn’t necessarily simple—so I thought I would do a “palette.” The interior of the sunburst would be a sequential green set, and then the outer ring would be categorically colored, but set with a conditional opacity based on the value. The calendar, similarly, operates on a value scale of greens, but I wanted to lay it out on a day by day basis to get to a point of campaign spending.
The critiques were so essential for understanding how a user would actually look at my work, and what they would be expecting to see and would want to play with when engaging with it. As a result of the critiques, I ended up including summary statistics in my exploratory dashboard—I didn’t have enough time to include everything I wanted to, but aside from that, I would have reverse engineered the personal automobile mileage and created a tooltip for the sunburst contextualizing it.
I liked our design process in class, but if I had to create my own, I think I would add a step for recalculating scope between the prospectus and the sketches. I would create a flow chart of the aspects that the dataset covers, and then figure out which aspects I’m most interested in.
My projects stuck pretty close to their prospecti, aside from the scope of the data involved. I quickly discovered that the scope I had chosen was not just too big—it wasn’t feasible in terms of the project topic. I ended up going from data spanning five years to data spanning the length of a Congressional term, which made it both much easier to visualize and lighter on the browser.
Most of my major challenges stemmed from the fact that I am overambitious when it comes to visualization—I always push for a more interesting way to seeing the data. However, in light of the fact that I was learning a new framework, perhaps I should not have flown so close to the sun, as it were. That said, I thought it would be easier to create a single-level treemap than it actually was, and because I created so many visualizations that were reliant on hierarchical data, I ended up learning a lot about hierarchies and data manipulation. Prior to this project creation, I thought I knew JavaScript, and now I know way more JavaScript than I knew before. I also learned that while being overambitious is great for learning, it’s more suited for projects without deadlines.
I was actually surprised at how easily pies and arcs came to me—I thought it would be a lot harder to generate them. I was able to put together a sunburst and a donut chart with considerably less frustration than creating a treemap.
If I had more time and resources, I would try to make the code lighter—the way I’ve coded the projects isn’t really easy on the browser, and it takes a long time to load the data. There are definitely visualization projects I’ve seen that use similar amounts of data in very lightweight ways, so I know it’s possible; I’d just need to do more research to figure out how to trim the code needed. Additionally, one of the things I really wanted to implement in my narrative project that would end up taking much more time was a juxtaposed interactive graph so that people could select their own representatives and compare them to the top 10 spenders. I will most likely keep whittling at this project even after the semester is over, because I think this topic is really important and I know that a lot of people don’t know who their representatives are or how to hold them accountable, and this project can at least help them know how to contact their representatives.
